>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, JANUARY 18:
THE PRESIDENT FINALIZES A PLAN
TO INCREASE TAX BREAKS FOR THE
MIDDLE CLASS THAT WOULD BE PAID
FOR BY THE RICH.
A NEW STUDY SHOWS JUST HOW MANY
SCHOOLCHILDREN ACROSS THE
COUNTRY ARE GROWING UP POOR.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, AN
AMBITIOUS PROGRAM TO COUNT ALL
OF THE ELEPHANTS IN AFRICA.
>> YOU CAN'T FIGHT A WAR TO SAVE
SOMETHING IF YOU DON'T KNOW HOW
MANY YOU ARE TRYING TO SAVE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT, ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT OBAMA REPORTEDLY WILL
UNVEIL A PLAN TO OFFER TAX
RELIEF FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS
DURING HIS STATE OF THE UNION
ADDRESS TUESDAY NIGHT.
THE PLAN WOULD BE PAID FOR BY
INCREASING TAXES THE RICH PAY ON
INVESTMENTS AND INHERITED
PROPERTY.
FOR MORE ABOUT THE PRESIDENT'S
PROPOSAL, ITS CHANCES OF SUCCESS
AND ITS POLITICAL IMPACT, WE ARE
JOINED NOW FROM WASHINGTON BY
CAROL LEE.
SHE IS WHITE HOUSE CORRESPONDENT
FOR THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL."
>> DOES THE ADMINISTRATION
SAY THAT THIS WILL HELP AND
HOW?
>> THEIR MAIN TARGET IS THE
MIDDLE CLASS.
AND THEY-- THEIR ARGUMENT IS
THAT IT WILL HELP THE MIDDLE
CLASS BY TAKING-- CLOSING
CERTAIN TAX LOOPHOLES THAT
THEY SAY BENEFIT THE TOP 1%
OF AMERICANS AND MAKING
DIFFERENT CHANGES TO THE TAX
CODE INCLUDING RAISING THE
CAPITAL GAINS TAX FROM 23.8%
TO 28% BY, AS YOU MENTIONED,
TAXING SOME OF THESE
INVESTMENTS AND ASSETS THAT
PEOPLE TRANSFER TO THEIR
CHILDREN, THAT CURRENTLY ARE
NOT TAXED.
AND A NUMBER OF OTHER
THINGS.
AND WHAT THEY WOULD DO WITH
THAT MONEY WHICH IS ROUGHLY
SEVERAL HUNDRED BILLION
DOLLARS, IS PUT IT TOWARDS
PROPOSALS SUCH AS TRIPLING
THE CHILD TAX CREDIT, SO
THAT WOULD GO FROM 1,000 TO
$3,000.
THEY'RE PROPOSING TO CREATE
A NEW TAX CREDIT FOR
HOUSEHOLDS WHERE BOTH
SPOUSES WORK.
AND IF THE PRESIDENT HAS
UNVEILED A PROPOSAL TO OFFER
FREE COMMUNITY COLLEGE FOR
FOLKS AND THAT'S ANOTHER
THING THAT THIS WOULD PAY
FOR.
SO IT'S BASICALLY THE
PRESIDENT'S OPENING BID ON A
NUMBER OF TAX ISSUES THAT
HAVE BEEN INVESTIGATING
WASHINGTON FOR A LONG TIME.
AND SO FAR IT HAS NOT GOTTEN
A VERY WARM RECEPTION FROM
REPUBLICANS.
BUT THE WHITE HOUSE'S
ARGUMENT IS THAT THIS WOULD
HELP THE MIDDLE CLASS, THE
REPUBLICANS SAY THAT THEY
ARE NO FOCUSED ON THE MIDDLE
CLASS.
THE ECONOMY IS DOING BETTER
SO NOW'S THE TIME TO DO
THINGS, TAKE STEPS LIKE
THIS.
AND WILE CONCEDING THAT THEY
PROBABLY WON'T GET
EVERYTHING THAT THEY WANT,
WHICH IS A VERY OPTIMISTIC
VIEW OF THIS PACKAGE GIVEN
THE RESPONSE THAT WE'VE SEEN
FROM REPUBLICANS, THE HOPE
IS THAT THIS IS AN OPENING
BID TO WHAT THE WHITE HOUSE
HOPES ARE BROADER
NEGOTIATIONS ON SOME OF
THESE INDIVIDUAL TAX CODE
ISSUES.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT SO,
WHAT ARE THE POLITICAL
IMPLICATIONS EVEN IF IT
CAN'T GET THROUGH CONGRESS?
>> WELL, IT SEPTEMBERS THE
PARAMETERS OF THE DEBATE FOR
2015 WHICH IS TURNING INTO
2016.
AND THE TWO THINGS THAT THE
PARTIES HAVE AGREED ON, YOU
HAVE SEEN THIS IN A NUMBER
OF POTENTIAL REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES,
YOU'VE HEARD IT FROM FORMER
SECRETARY OF STATE HILLARY
CLINTON AND THE WHITE HOUSE
IS REALLY PRESSING ON THIS
ISSUE, IS THAT THE MIDDLE
CLASS IS IN NEED OF HELP.
AND THAT WAGES ARE STAGNANT.
AND WHILE GDP IS GROWING AND
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE IS AT NEW
LOWS, THE MIDDLE CLASS IS
STILL REALLY STRUGGLING AND
REQUIRES SOME TARGETED
MEASURES TO TRY AND BUILD
THEM UP.
AND SO WHAT YOU'RE GOING TO
HEAR THE WHITE HOUSE AND
DEMOCRATS DO WHEN THEY GET
WITH THESE MEASURES, THE
PACKAGE THAT THE PRESIDENT
IS GOING TO ROLL OUT ON
TUESDAY IN THE STATE OF THE
UNION ADDRESS IS PUT THE
BALL IN REPUBLICAN'S COURT
TO SAY OKAY, WELL, WHAT ARE
YOUR PROPOSALS, WHAT DO YOU
WANT TO DO.
AND IF YOU DON'T SUPPORT
THIS, WHAT DO YOU SUPPORT.
AND SO IT'S DESIGNED TO,
EVEN IF IT DOESN'T PASS,
MOVE THE DEBATE ALONG TO
WHERE THE TWO SIDES ARE
HAVING TO STAKEOUT THEIR
TERRITORY THAT HEAD OF THE
2016 ELECTION.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
CAROL LEE JOINING US FROM
WASHINGTON FROM THE "THE
WALL STREET JOURNAL".
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: FEDERAL LAW
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS SAY
MULTIPLE SHOTS WERE FIRED LAST
NIGHT OUTSIDE THE DELAWARE HOME
OF VICE PRESIDENT JOSEPH BIDEN.
NEITHER THE VICE PRESIDENT NOR
HIS WIFE WERE HOME AT THE TIME
OF THE INCIDENT.
AUTHORITIES SAY THE VEHICLE FROM
WHICH THE SHOTS CAME RACED AWAY
BEFORE ANYONE COULD BE
APPREHENDED.
THE BIDENS' HOME IS SET BACK A
FEW HUNDRED YARDS FROM THE ROAD.
IN DRESDEN GERMANY, AN ANTI-
IMMIGRATION GROUP KNOWN AS
PATRIOTIC EUROPEANS AGAINST
ISLAMIZATION OF THE WEST CALLED
OFF A RALLY THAT WAS TO HAVE
TAKEN PLACE TOMORROW BECAUSE OF
TERROR THREATS AGAINST ITS
LEADER, LUTZ BACHMANN.
A POLICE SPOKESMAN SAID THAT A
BAN HAS BEEN PLACED ON ALL
PUBLIC MARCHES IN THE CITY UNTIL
MIDNIGHT TOMORROW BECAUSE OF
THREATS TO KILL AN ENEMY OF
ISLAM.
THE THREAT WAS CONVEYED IN
ARABIC ON A TWITTER POST.
RECENT ANTI-IMMIGRATION RALLIES
THERE HAVE DRAWN AS MANY AS
25,000 DEMONSTRATORS.
IN IRAQ TODAY, ISIS FREED AT
LEAST 200 MOSTLY ELDERLY AND
INFIRMED PRISONERS ITS FIGHTERS
HAD CAPTURED FIVE MONTHS AGO.
THE GROUP DID NOT EXPLAIN ITS
DECISION.
THOSE RELEASED WERE YAZIDIS, A
MINORITY RELIGIOUS GROUP THAT
REGULARLY HAS BEEN TARGETED BY
THE EXTREMISTS.
AS YOU'LL RECALL, THOUSANDS OF
YAZIDIS WERE STRANDED ON A
MOUNTAIN LAST SUMMER AFTER ISIS
SWEPT INTO IRAQ FROM SYRIA.
ISRAEL HAS LAUNCHED ANOTHER
ATTACK INSIDE SYRIA.
ISRAELI MILITARY SOURCES CONFIRM
THAT AN ISRAELI HELICOPTER FIRED
MISSILES AT A CONVOY TRAVELING
NEAR THE GOLAN HEIGHTS.
FIVE SENIOR MEMBERS OF HEZBOLLAH
REPORTEDLY WERE KILLED.
JUST DAYS AGO, A LEBANESE
HEZBOLLAH LEADER SAID HE
CONSIDERS ISRAELI STRIKES IN
SYRIA AGGRESSION AND SAID SYRIA
AND ITS ALLIES HAVE THE RIGHT TO
RETALIATE.
ISRAEL HAS STRUCK SYRIA SEVERAL
TIMES SINCE THE START OF THE
CIVIL WAR THERE, THE ISRAELI
GOVERNMENT SAYS IT IS PART OF
THEIR EFFORT TO KEEP ARMS FROM
REACHING HEZBOLLAH FIGHTERS.
POPE FRANCIS WRAPPED UP A WEEK-
LONG VISIT TO ASIA TODAY, BY
CELEBRATING MASS IN FRONT OF
MILLIONS OF WORSHIPPERS WHO
TURNED OUT IN MANILA DESPITE A
STEADY RAIN.
THE PONTIFF SAID FAMILIES NEED
TO BE PROTECTED FROM PROGRAMS HE
DESCRIBED AS BEING CONTRARY TO
ALL THAT WE HOLD TRUE AND
SACRED.
AN APPARENT REFERENCE TO A 2012
LAW THAT MADE BIRTH CONTROL MORE
AVAILABLE IN THE PHILIPPINES.
FIGHTING ONCE AGAIN IS
INTENSIFYING IN UKRAINE, DESPITE
A CEASE-FIRE BETWEEN THE
GOVERNMENT AND PRO-RUSSIAN
REBELS THAT WENT INTO EFFECT
LAST SEPTEMBER.
OVERNIGHT, GOVERNMENT TROOPS
LAUNCHED AN OFFENSIVE AND
AFTERWARDS SAID THEY HAD
REGAINED CONTROL OF MOST OF THE
AIRPORT IN THE PROVINCIAL
CAPITAL, DONETSK.
REBELS HAD MADE GAINS THERE IN
RECENT WEEKS.
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
SAYS NEARLY 5,000 PEOPLE HAVE
BEEN KILLED SINCE FIGHTING BEGAN
IN EASTERN UKRAINE IN EARLY
2014.
A PROMINENT NORTH KOREAN
DEFECTOR HAS ADMITTED THAT PARTS
OF HIS ACCOUNT ABOUT LIFE IN A
LABOR CAMP THERE WERE
INACCURATE.
SHIN DONG HYUK WAS THE SUBJECT
OF A BEST-SELLING BOOK AND
TESTIFIED IN FRONT OF THE U.N.
COMMISSION OF INQUIRY ABOUT
NORTH KOREAN HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS.
THERE, HE SPOKE ABOUT HOW HE WAS
TORTURED IN PRISON AND DESCRIBED
HIS HARROWING ESCAPE.
SHIN IS STICKING TO THE BROAD
OUTLINE OF HIS EARLIER ACCOUNTS,
BUT HE NOW ADMITS THAT THE TIME
AND LOCATION OF CERTAIN EVENTS
WERE INCORRECT.
TODAY HE POSTED A MESSAGE ON
FACEBOOK TO APOLOGIZE AND WROTE,
"EVERY ONE OF US HAVE STORIES OR
THINGS WE'D LIKE TO HIDE."
BACK IN THIS COUNTRY, THE
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION
HAS SUSPENDED A PROGRAM WHICH
HAD ALLOWED SAFETY INSPECTORS TO
SKIP SECURITY CHECKPOINTS WHILE
ON THE JOB.
THE DECISION FOLLOWS TUESDAY'S
ARREST OF AN FAA AGENT AT NEW
YORK CITY'S LAGUARDIA AIRPORT.
HE HAD CARRIED A FIREARM IN HIS
CARRY-ON BAG AFTER BYPASSING
SECURITY CHECKPOINTS AT
HARTSFIELD-ATLANTA INTERNATIONAL
AIRPORT.
INVESTMENT BY VENTURE
CAPITALISTS INTO START-UPS IS
SURGING.
MEASURED BY DOLLARS, IT WAS UP
61% LAST YEAR OVER 2013.
THIS, ACCORDING TO A SURVEY BY
THE NATIONAL VENTURE CAPITAL
ASSOCIATION AND PRICEWATERHOUSE.
THE SINGLE BIGGEST BENEFICIARY
WAS UBER, WHICH USES A MOBILE
APP TO CONNECT DRIVERS AND
PASSENGERS.
THE COMPANY NOW COMPETES WITH
STANDARD TAXI SERVICE IN MORE
THAN 200 CITIES AROUND THE
UNITED STATES AND OVERSEAS.
ALL TOLD, ESTIMATES ARE THAT
VENTURE CAPITALISTS PUMPED MORE
THAN $48 BILLION INTO STARTUPS
LAST YEAR.
NUMBERS NOT SEEN SINCE 2000, THE
TAIL END OF THE DOT-COM BOOM.
AND MORE THAN 50 YEARS AFTER
THEY WERE CONVICTED OF
TRESPASSING FOR SITTING AT A
WHITES ONLY LUNCH COUNTER IN
SOUTH CAROLINA, MEMBERS OF THE
FRIENDSHIP NINE WILL HAVE THEIR
CRIMINAL RECORDS CLEARED LATER
THIS MONTH.
IN AN ACT OF DEFIANCE, MOST OF
THOSE CONVICTED FOR THEIR SIT-IN
CHOSE TO WORK ON A CHAIN GANG AT
A COUNTY PRISON FARM RATHER THAN
PAY A FINE.
>> Sreenivasan: A NEWLY RELEASED
REPORT BY THE SOUTHERN EDUCATION
FOUNDATION SAYS A MAJORITY OF
ALL PUBLIC SCHOOL STUDENTS
ACROSS THE UNITED STATES COME
FROM LOW INCOME FAMILIES.
EXPERTS SAY THAT COULD HAVE
IMPORTANT IMPLICATIONS FOR THE
NATION. FOR MORE ABOUT THAT, WE
ARE JOINED NOW FROM WASHINGTON
BY LYNDSEY LAYTON.
SHE COVERED THE STORY FOR "THE
WASHINGTON POST."
SOUFER THE NUMBERS HAVE BEEN
GETTING WORSE OVER NUMBER,
RIGHT.
TEN YEARS AGO IT WAS ONLY
FOUR STATES THAT HAVE MORE
THAN HALF THEIR POPULATION,
SCHOOLCHILDREN POPULATIONS
QUALIFY FOR FREE OR REDUCED
LUNCHES, NOW IT'S 21 STATES.
>> THAT'S RIGHT, HARI, WE'VE
SEEN A REALLY RAPID
ACCELERATION IN THIS GROUP
OF KIDS.
AND OF COURSE, YOU KNOW,
PEOPLE POINT TO THE 2008
RECESSION AS SOMETHING THAT
REALLY MADE THESE NUMBERS
EXPLODE.
BUT WE'VE SEEN CONTINUED
ACCELERATION.
IT HASN'T STABILIZED.
IT'S GETTING WORSE.
AND NOW WE'RE AT 51%.
SO A MAJORITY OF PUBLIC
SCHOOLKIDS QUALIFY FOR FREE
FOOD.
>> Sreenivasan: SO WHAT ARE
SOME OF THE OTHER STRAINS ON
THE SYSTEM.
IN YOUR STORY I REMEMBER
SEEING THAT BASICALLY
TEACHERS ARE STARTING TO ACT
MORE THAN JUST TEACHERS,
THEY ARE SOCIAL WORKERS,
THEY'RE PSYCHOLOGISTS.
>> WELL, IF YOU TALK TO ANY
TEACHER IN A HIGH-POVERTY
SCHOOL, THEY WILL TELL YOU
THAT THEY SPEND A HUGE
AMOUNT OF THEIR TIME JUST
MAKING SURE THE KIDS ARE
OKAY.
I MEAN THESE KIDS DON'T COME
INTO SCHOOL WONDERING AM I
GOING TO TAKE A TEST TODAY.
THEY COME INTO SCHOOL
WONDERING AM I GOING TO BE
OKAY.
I TALKED WITH ONE
KINDERGARTEN TEACHER, A
VETERAN TEACHER FROM NEW
MEXICO.
SHE TEACHES IN DOWNTOWN
ALBUQUERQUE.
AND SHE TOLD ME THAT THE
FIRST HOUR OF HER MORNING
SHE DOES AN INVENTORY TO
CHECKER KIDS.
HAVE THEY EATEN, ARE THEY
CLEAN.
SHE KEEPS A DRAWER FULL OF
SOCKS, SHOES, CLEAN
UNDERWEAR, TOOTHBRUSHES FOR
THEM, JUST TO TAKE CARE OF
THEIR IMMEDIATE NEEDS.
SHE CAN'T EVEN FOCUS ON THE
ACADEMICS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ARE
SOME OF THE IMPACTS OR THE
POTENTIAL IMPACTS FOR
EDUCATION POLICY?
I MEAN RIGHT NOW THERE IS A
NATIONAL CONVERSATION GOING
ABOUT TESTING AND WHETHER TO
REAUTHORIZE NO CHILD LEFT
BEHIND OR THE COMMON CORE,
ET CETERA, ET CETERA.
BUT HOW CAN WE REALLY FOCUS
ON TESTS IF WHAT YOU ARE
SAYING AND WHAT THIS TEACHER
IS SAYING IS THAT YOU REALLY
HAVE A DEEPER UNDERLYING
PROBLEM.
THE KIDS AREN'T GOING TO BE
THINKING ABOUT TESTS IF THEY
ARE THINKING ABOUT BEING
HUNG REAL ESTATE.
>> A LOT OF ADVOCATES FOR
KIDS AND DEMOCRATS AND
PROGRESSIVES WANT TO SEE
MORE SPENDING TO CREATE WRAP
AROUND SERVICES AROUND THESE
KIDS.
THAT THE SCHOOLS NOT ONLY
NEED HELP WITH THE ACADEMICS
WITH TECHNOLOGY AND
CURRICULUM AND TEACHER
TRAINING, BUT THEY ALSO NEED
TO PROVIDE SOCIAL SERVICES
FOR THESE CHILDREN.
THAT'S THE ARGUMENT THAT A
LOT OF PROGRESSIVES ARE
MAKING.
RIGHT NOW IN TOWN HERE THE
CONGRESS IS ABOUT TO DEBATE
THE REAUTHORIZATION OF THE
MAIN FEDERAL EDUCATION LAW.
AND REPUBLICANS THINK THAT
PERHAPS WE'RE JUST NOT
SPENDING OUR MONEY
EFFICIENTLY.
AND THAT IF STATES HAD MORE
AUTHORITY AND MORE POWER IN
THEIR SPENDING, THAT THE
MONEY WOULD GO TO, YOU KNOW,
THE GREATEST NEEDS.
AND THAT WE NEED TO
STREAMLINE SPENDING AND GIVE
MORE AUTHORITY TO STATES.
THERE'S A REAL DEBATE GOING
ON ABOUT WHAT TO DO ABOUT
THIS PROBLEM.
>> Sreenivasan: ARE THERE
PATTERNS THAT YOU SEE HERE
EMERGING WHEN YOU LOOK AT
THE DATA AROUND THE COUNTRY
OR CERTAIN PARTS HIT WORSE
THAN OTHERS?
>> ALL YOU NEED TO DO IS
GLANCE AT THE MAP.
IT'S AVAILABLE AT THE
SOUTHERN EDUCATION
FOUNDATION WEB SITE AND ALSO
AT THE "WASHINGTON POST".
YOU JUST TAKE A LOOK AT THAT
MAP AND YOU CAN SEE THE RED
AREAS WHERE YOU'VE GOT THE
HIGH CONCENTRATION OF POOR
KIDS, IT'S OBVIOUSLY THE
SOUTH AND IT'S THE WEST.
SO THOSE ARE, YOU KNOW,
BORDER STATES WITH A LOT OF
IMMIGRATION.
THAT'S OBVIOUS.
BUT THEN YOU ALSO SEE IN
OTHER PARTS OF THE COUNTRY
WHERE YOU DON'T EXPECT THAT.
VERMONT, FOR INSTANCE, ONE
OUT OF EVERY THREE KIDS IN
VERMONT HAS-- NEEDS FREE
LUNCHES AND BREAKFAST.
SO THE NEED IS GROWING.
IT'S ALL OVER THE COUNTRY.
AND BEYOND THE OBVIOUS
ISSUES IN THE BORDER STATES,
YOU CAN FIND IT ALL OVER THE
PLACE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
LINDSEY LEIGHTON FROM THE
WASHINGTON POST, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANKS, HARI.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
OUR ORIGINAL IN-DEPTH REPORTS
FROM AROUND THE WORLD.
FOR DECADES NOW, WE'VE HEARD
ABOUT THE GREAT DAMAGE POACHERS
ARE INFLICTING ON AFRICA'S
ELEPHANT POPULATION.
THE BEST ESTIMATES ARE THAT TENS
OF THOUSANDS OF ELEPHANTS ARE
KILLED THERE EVERY YEAR.
BUT THE ACTUAL NUMBERS ARE
DIFFICULT TO MEASURE.
NOW, AN EXTRAORDINARY EFFORT IS
UNDERWAY TO COUNT ALL THE
ELEPHANTS ACROSS THAT VAST
CONTINENT, SOMETHING PEOPLE
BEHIND THE PROJECT CALL AN
ESSENTIAL STEP TO SAVE THEM.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
MARTIN SEEMUNGAL REPORTS.
>> Reporter: SCRAMBLING THROUGH
THE ETHIOPIAN BUSHLANDS, A TEAM
OF CONSERVATION BIOLOGISTS,
RUNNING TO FIND AN ELEPHANT,
DARTED FROM THE AIR WITH A
TRANQUILIZER EARLIER AND PART OF
A MUCH BIGGER DISCOVERY.
>> WE TOOK OFF FROM A VERY SMALL
AIRSTRIP OVER THIS RANGE OF
HILLS INTO THIS VALLEY, AND IT
WAS PARADISE LIKE THE LAST
FRONTIER AND I JUST COULD FEEL
WE WERE ON THE VERGE OF
DISCOVERING SOMETHING GREAT.
AND WE DID, NEARLY THREE
THOUSAND ELEPHANTS, UNKNOWN TO
ANYBODY, TUCKED AWAY, SAFE IN A
VERY REMOTE CORNER OF ETHIOPIA.
>> Reporter: CONSIDERING
ELEPHANT NUMBERS ARE DWINDLING
ACROSS AFRICA IT IS A
REMARKABLE FIND.
THE TEAM FITS IT WITH A HUGE
COLLAR SO THEY CAN TRACK THE
HERD.
THE MISSION TO ETHIOPIA IS PART
OF A PLAN TO COUNT AFRICA'S
ELEPHANTS.
THAT'S RIGHT, COUNT ALL THE
ELEPHANTS IN AFRICA.
IT IS AN AMBITIOUS TWO YEAR
PROJECT EXPECTED TO CONCLUDE IN
MAY.
CALLED THE GREAT ELEPHANT CENSUS
THE SEVEN MILLION DOLLAR
INITIATIVE IS BEING FUNDED BY
AMERICAN PHILANTHROPIST PAUL
ALLEN.
IT IS LED BY CHASE, HE GREW UP
IN BOTSWANA AND HAS DEDICATED
HIS LIFE TO PROTECTING ELEPHANTS
FOUNDING A NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATION CALLED ELEPHANTS
WITHOUT BORDERS.
>> HOW MANY ELEPHANTS ARE ON THE
AFRICAN CONTINENT?
AND THAT'S A QUESTION WHICH
NOBODY CAN ANSWER WITH ANY
CERTAINTY.
AND THE WORLDS LARGEST
TERRESTRIAL ANIMAL, THE SIX TON
ANIMAL ROAMING OUR CONTINENT,
AND PEOPLE CAN'T TELL YOU HOW
MANY ARE LEFT.
THEY CAN TELL YOU HOW MANY ARE
DYING, 100 ELEPHANTS A DAY
AFRICA IS LOSING.
>> Reporter: ELEPHANTS DIE OF
NATURAL CAUSES, OLD AGE,
DISEASE.
THIS YOUNG ELEPHANT WAS HUNTED
AND KILLED BY A PRIDE OF LIONS
PART OF THE NATURAL CYCLE OF
LIFE IN AFRICA.
BUT BIG NUMBERS OF ELEPHANTS ARE
ALSO KILLED WHEN THEY COME INTO
CONTACT WITH HUMANS.
FARMERS IN PARTICULAR, THEY
SOMETIMES LOSE CROPS TO
ELEPHANTS AND SO THEY SHOOT
THEM.
AND THEN THERE IS POACHING.
DURING THE 1980'S THERE WERE
SOME YEARS WHEN 100,000
ELEPHANTS WERE KILLED FOR THEIR
TUSKS.
KENYA IS ESTIMATED TO HAVE LOST
83% OF ITS ELEPHANT POPULATION
DURING THAT PERIOD.
IAIN DOUGLAS HAMILTON IS A
LEADING AUTHORITY ON ELEPHANTS.
HE IS BASED IN NAIROBI AND HE
SAYS THERE HAS BEEN ANOTHER
SPIKE IN ELEPHANT POACHING
RECENTLY.
>> IN 2011 WE ESTIMATED THERE
WERE 40,000 ELEPHANTS ILLEGALLY
KILLED.
IF THAT RATE WERE TO CONTINUE IT
WOULD INEVITABLE DRIVE THE
ELEPHANTS DOWN, BECAUSE THEY
CANNOT REPRODUCE FAST ENOUGH TO
REPLACE THE LOSSES CAUSED BY
NATURAL MORTALITY AND ILLEGAL
KILLING FOR IVORY COMBINED.
>> Reporter: HAMILTON IS ONE OF
NEARLY 50 CONSERVATIONISTS
ACROSS AFRICA SUPPORTING THE
GREAT ELEPHANT CENSUS.
>> YOU CAN'T FIGHT A WAR TO SAVE
SOMETHING IF YOU DON'T KNOW HOW
MANY YOU ARE TRYING TO SAVE.
>> SO TO HAVE THIS FOUNDATIONAL
INFORMATION ON PRECISELY HOW
MANY ELEPHANTS ARE LEFT WILL
HELP GAUGE FUTURE CONSERVATION
EFFORTS.
>> Reporter: IT IS AN ENORMOUS
CHALLENGE, ELEPHANTS ARE FOUND
IN 37 AFRICAN NATIONS.
POPULATIONS VARY IN SIZE, BUT
SOME COUNTRIES REFUSED TO TAKE
PART IN THE SURVEY.
>> AND THAT FOR ME HAS BEEN THE
MOST DIFFICULT PART OF THE GREAT
ELEPHANT CENSUS TO COMPREHEND,
WHY PEOPLE, WHY COUNTRIES DON'T
WANT THEIR ELEPHANTS COUNTED.
>> Reporter: CHASE IS OPTIMISTIC
MANY COUNTRIES WILL ULTIMATELY
JOIN THE CENSUS.
IN THE MEANTIME, HE IS WORKING
HARD IN THE 18 NATIONS THAT HAVE
AGREED.
FROM SOUTH SUDAN IN THE NORTH
POCKETS OF WEST AFRICA THROUGH
EAST AND CENTRAL AFRICA DOWN TO
SOUTH AFRICA.
AND BOTSWANA HIS HOME COUNTRY,
WITH AN ESTIMATED POPULATION OF
100,000 ELEPHANTS, THE LARGEST
IN AFRICA.
COUNTING IS DONE FROM THE AIR.
A SMALL PLANE FLYING LOW ACROSS
THE AFRICAN LANDSCAPE.
THE PLANE FLIES BACK AND FORTH
IN A SERIES OF STRAIGHT LINES
CALLED TRANSECT LINES
PREPROGRAMMED AHEAD OF TIME
USING G.P.S. COORDINATES.
THIS LASTS ABOUT FOUR HOURS.
IT IS TEDIOUS, IT IS MENTALL
EXHAUSTING BUT IT'S REALLY
THE BEST WAY TO COUNT ELEPHANTS.
>> LOOK AT THAT HERD.
>> THERE'S A TREMENDOUS AMOUNT
OF SKILL THAT GOES INTO FLYING
AN AERIAL SURVEY.
A CONSISTENT HEIGHT.
YOU CAN'T DEVIATE OFF THE
TRANSECT LINE.
YOU'VE GOT TO MAINTAIN A SPEED
OF 170 KILOMETERS, YOU GO TOO
FAST YOU'RE GOING TO MISS
ANIMALS.
>> Reporter: KELLY LANDEN IS ONE
OF THE REGULAR SPOTTERS.
ORIGINALLY FROM BUFFALO, NEW
YORK, NOW LIVING IN BOTSWANA.
>> WELL THE TRANSECT LINES ARE
ABOUT 15 MINUTES EACH IN ONE
DIRECTION AND THEN ON THE TURN
WE GET A LITTLE BIT OF AN EYE
BREAK, WE STRETCH, WE CLOSE OUR
EYES AND TRY AND GET A REGROUP
FOR A FEW MINUTES UNTIL WE GET
TO THE NEXT TRANSECT WHICH IS
REALLY QUITE A RELIEF.
>> Reporter: IN NEIGHBORING
SOUTH AFRICA THE MASSIVE KRUGER
PARK IS ALSO HOME TO THOUSANDS
OF ELEPHANTS.
CHASE AND THE TEAM WON'T HAVE TO
DO ANY COUNTING HERE, BECAUSE
THE SOUTH AFRICANS WILL PROVIDE
FIGURES FROM THEIR OWN AERIAL
SURVEYS.
SAM FERREIRA IS AN ECOLOGIST IN
KRUGER PARK WELL AWARE OF THE
DIFFICULTIES OF COUNTING
ELEPHANTS FROM THE AIR.
>> IMAGINE AN ELEPHANT STANDS
UNDER A TREE.
YOU FLY OVER IT.
THE ELEPHANT IS THERE BUT IT'S
NOT AVAILABLE FOR YOU TO BE
SAMPLED AND YOU CAN'T SEE IT.
>> Reporter: TO COMPENSATE
CAMERAS ARE MOUNTED ON EACH SIDE
OF THE PLANE THE SPOTTERS
CONSTANTLY TAKE PICTURES.
AFTER THE FLIGHT, THE PHOTOS ARE
DOWNLOADED AND USED TO VERIFY
WHAT THE SPOTTERS HAVE REPORTED.
USING A SPECIAL PROGRAM EACH
ELEPHANT IS HIGHLIGHTED MAKING
IT MUCH EASIER TO SPOT THOSE
ELEPHANTS UNDER THE TREES.
>> THIS VERIFICATION HELPS QUITE
A BIT.
ESPECIALLY WHEN YOU HAVE LARGE
HERDS THAT ARE MIXED.
WHEN YOU GO BY FOR JUST A FEW
MINUTES SO THE NUMBERS ARE
REALLY WELL VERIFIED WHEN YOU
COUNT IT ON THE COMPUTER.
RIGHT NOW I MISSED AN ELEPHANT
ON THIS ONE.
>> IT WOULD BE EXTREMELY
DIFFICULT IF WE DIDN'T HAVE THIS
TECHNOLOGY AVAILABLE TO US TO
FLY AERIAL SURVEYS OVER SUCH A
VAST SCALE AN AREA THAT WE'RE
COVERING.
>> Reporter: WILDLIFE OFFICIALS
WITH THE BOTSWANA GOVERNMENT ARE
OBSERVING AND ASSISTING WITH THE
COUNT HERE.
IT IS INDICATIVE OF THE CONCERN
AFRICAN NATIONS HAVE FOR
ELEPHANTS.
ALFRED SEONYATSENG IS A SENIOR
WILDLIFE WARDEN.
>> I THINK IT'S GOING TO HELP
ALL THE AFRICAN COUNTRIES TO
KNOW AND CONSERVE AND TO KNOW
EXACTLY WHAT THE NUMBER THEY
HAVE AND THAT THEY CAN KNOW HOW
THEY CAN CONSERVE THEIR
ELEPHANTS.
>> IF WE DON'T INTERVENE IT'S
GOING TO BE A PROBLEM, THE
ELEPHANT WILL SOON DISAPPEAR.
>> Reporter: CHASE IS ENCOURAGED
BY THE RESPONSE SO FAR HE SAYS
THAT TRIP TO ETHIOPIA GAVE HIM A
LOT OF REASONS TO BE HOPEFUL.
>> AS SOON AS A GOVERNMENT HEARS
THAT THEY HAVE 3,000 ELEPHANTS
TUCKED AWAY IN THE SOUTHERN
CORNER OF THEIR COUNTRY, WHICH
THEY DIDN'T KNOW ABOUT-- MAN!
THAT CHANGES THINGS, THAT GETS
PEOPLE EXCITED AND THAT'S WHAT
WE'VE DISCOVERED ON THE GREAT
ELEPHANT CENSUS.
>> Reporter: AND THERE ARE MANY
MORE COUNTRIES STILL TO BE
COUNTED.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW DO YOU COUNT
ALL THE ELEPHANTS ON AN ENTIRE
CONTINENT?
GET AN INSIDE LOOK AT
newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE IS NO
SHORTAGE OF REPORTING ABOUT THE
HEALTH DANGERS ASSOCIATED WITH
OBESITY.
BUT SCIENTISTS AT CAMBRIDGE
UNIVERSITY IN ENGLAND FOLLOWED
MORE THAN 300,000 PEOPLE OVER 12
YEARS AND CONCLUDED THAT
INACTIVITY ACTUALLY KILLS MORE
PEOPLE.
THE SOLUTION: WALK.
BRISKLY.
RICHARD MORGAN OF ITV REPORTS.
FOR THIS 62 YEAR OLD WALKING IS
A VITAL PART OF EVERYDAY LIFE.
IN THE COMPANY OF HIS DOG
CLEOPATRA, HE WALKS NEARLY TWO
HOURS EACH DAY.
AND HE TELLS ME, IT IS A HABIT
THAT HE COULDN'T DO WITHOUT.
>> AT MY AGE, STRENUOUS
EXERCISE IS A BIT OUT OF THE
QUESTION.
BUT WALKING JUST, IT'S A
PLEASURE AND IT KEEPS ME
MOTIVATED.
>> AND ACCORDING TO FIGURES
OUT TODAY, WE WOULD ALL DO
WELL TOO TAKE A LEAF OUT OF
LEONARD'S BOOK.
RESEARCHERS CLAIM OBESITY
CAUSE 347,000 DEATHS ACROSS
EUROPE IN 2008, BUT TWIST AS
MANY, 667,000 DEATHS WERE
PUT DOWN TO PHYSICAL
INACTIVITY IT IT'S CLAIMED
MODERATE EXERCISE EACH DAY
CAN REDUCE THIS RISK BY 16
TO 30%.
THAT CAN MEAN AS LITTLE AS
20 MINUTES OF BRISK WALKING.
>> SOCIETY HAS CHANGED.
WE'VE ENGINEERED PHYSICAL
ACTIVITY OUT OF OUR EVERY
DAY LIVES.
WHAT WE FEED TO DO IS
REVERSE THAT PROCESS.
REENGINEER IT BACK IN.
>> BACK IN THIS LONDON PARK,
THOSE TAKING A STROLL SAID
THEY HAD NO DOUBT ABOUT THE
BENEFITS.
>> I'M NOT GENERALLY A VERY
SPORTY PERSON.
BUT I LOVE WALKING THE DOG.
>> YOU MOVE YOUR MUSCLES.
>> I THINK EVERY NOW AND
AGAIN IT'S GOOD TO BREAK A
SWEAT BUT WALKING IS
PROBABLY THE BEST.
>> SO THE MESSAGE IS CLEAR,
IF YOU WANT TO LIVE LONGER,
GET YOUR TRAINERS ON,
WHETHER OR NOT YOU'VE GOT A
DOG.
RICHARD MORGAN, ITV NEWS.
>> I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> IMMIGRATION, HEALTH CARE,
CONFLICTS OVERSEAS.
A STATE OF THE UNION.
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS SET TO
DELIVER THE ANNUAL ADDRESS
TUESDAY, JANUARY 20.
TUNE IN FOR SPECIAL PROGRAM
APPROXIMATING FROM THE PBS
NEWSHOUR TEAM YOU TRUST
INCLUDING ANALYSIS FROM MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS.
>> WHEN THE DIRECTION OF OUR
COUNTRY IS AT STAKE, THERE'S
ONLY ONE PLACE YOU SHOULD
TURN-- THE "PBS NEWSHOUR".
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE
NEWS BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU
TONIGHT, NUCLEAR NEGOTIATIONS
BETWEEN IRAN AND THE WORLD'S
MAJOR POWERS RESUME TODAY IN
GENEVA, SWITZERLAND.
AFTERWARDS THE FRENCH
NEGOTIATOR SAID QUOTING NOW,
"THE MOOD WAS VERY GOOD BUT I
DON'T THINK WE MADE A LOT OF
PROGRESS."
THE TALKS RESUME NEXT MONTH.
JOIN US ON AIR AND ONLINE
TOMORROW.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.